The following tape contains lessons one
through five of the conversational
Cherokee course prepared by the Cherokee
Bilingual Education Program. Each lesson
begins with a dialogue with each phrase
recorded seven times. Listen to the first
three repetitions and repeat after the
fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh during
the pauses. Then continue with the drills
following the instructions provided in the
tape.
Conversational Cherokee Lesson 1.
Greetings. Hello John. OCO John. OCO John.
OCO John. OCO John. OCO John. OCO John.
Hello Ann. Osiyo Ann. Osiyo Ann. Osiyo
Ann. Osiyo Ann. Osiyo Ann.
How are you?
Fine.
Tawheegwa.
and you.
Do顯고 A Do顯고
Additional vocabulary
Repetition四
統
YID
Three. Aqugrund.
Aqugrund. Four.
Aqu olmaz.
Aquonzuela. Achoo-chah.
Hee-yah. Achoo-chah. Six. Hee-yah. Agay
-hoo-chah. Hee-yah. Agay-hoo-chah.
Question drill. You will hear the
question, what is this? in Cherokee six
times. Give a one word answer using the
noun found in the corresponding six
sentences in the additional vocabulary
drill. One. . . .
Two. . Kadda uusti Hina. Ama.
Ama. Three. Kadda uusti Hina.
Asvala.
Four. Kadda uusti Hina.
Additional question drill. Repetition. In
this drill, you will hear a question with
the six nouns, with each of the six nouns
used in the previous drills questioned.
That is, the question suffix will be
attached to these nouns. You will then
hear the answer. Repeat the answer, which
will be given twice. Repeat. One. Where is
he? Where is he? Where is he? Two. Two.
Three.
Four.
Conversation at normal speed. Do not
repeat. Listen for comprehension only.
Oseo, John. Oseo, huh? Tohiku. Tohiku.
End of lesson one.
Lesson 2. Dialogue. Hello. Oh, see y'all.
Oh, see y'all. Oh, see y'all. See y'all.
See y'all. See y'all. Hello. Hello? OCO.
OCO. OCO. OCO. OCO. OCO. OCO. Do you speak
English? English. Your negative on this.
Your negative on this. Your negative on
this. Your negative on this.
Your negative on this.
Your negative on this. Your negative on
this. Yes, I speak English well. All
right, home.
What is your name?
My name is Bill Brown. I am Bill Brown. I
am Bill Brown. I am Bill Brown. I am Bill
Brown. I am Bill Brown. I am Bill Brown. I
am Bill Brown. I am Bill
Brown. I am Bill
Brown. And you? What is your name? Yanhee.
Na h reappe. Na h reappe. Na h reappe. Na
h reappe. Na h reappe. Na h reappe. Na h
reappe.
Na h. On slowly. On slowly. On slowly. On
slowly. On slowly. On slowly. Do you want
water? I must do Lee I must do Lee I must
do Lee I must do Lee I must do Lee I must
do me I must do me yes I am thirsty for
water I'm locked today I'm locked today a
mock today a mark today a mark
today a mark
today Here is water.
Thanks.
Wado. Wado. Wado.
Additional vocabulary repetition. Repeat
after each phrase. One. Hiya kanagolosti.
Hiya kanagolosti. Hiya kanagolosti. Two.
Hiya, yagi. Hiya, yagi. Hiya, yagi. Three.
Hiya, kantoke.
Hiya, kantoke. Hiya, kantoke. Four. Hiya,
tena.
Take two liner. Here, take two liner.
Question drill. Listen to the question,
and then give the answer. Model.
Is this a boy? Yes, it's a boy. Here, I
choose a... I choose a... One. One.
Two.
Yagida
Three Hiyas kantoke
Kantoke da
Kantoke da Four.
Five.
Additional question drill. Model, what is
this? A woman. One. . Again. .
Again. .
After each question, , give the one word
answer which corresponds to the nouns in
numbers one through six. One. . Kadavusti
yaa. Kanagalausti.
Kanagalausti. Two. Kadavusti yaa. Yagi.
Yagi. Three. Kadavusti yaa. Kantoki.
Kantoki. Four.
Five.
Six.
Take two, Lena. Conversation at normal
speed. Do not repeat. Listen for
comprehension only. Siu. Oh, Siu. You want
to ask your own needs? Oh, I want to ask
my own needs. How do I do it? You can ask
Bill Brown. How do I do it? Oh, slowly.
How much do I do? Oh, how much do I do?
Oh, how much do I do? What do I do? Listen
once again.
End of lesson two.
Conversational Cherokee Lesson 3 Dialogue
with Mary and Charles Hello, Charles. See
you, Charles. See you, Charles. See you,
Charles. See you, Charles.
See you, Charles.
Hello, John.
Hello, Mary. See you, Mary. See you, Mary.
See you, Mary. See you, Mary.
See you, Mary. See you, Mary. See you,
Mary.
What are you doing?
I'm working.
What are you
building?
Jathaga Unniyasthi Jathaga Unniyasthi
Jathaga Unniyasthi Jathaga
Unniyasthi Jathaga Unniyasthi Jathaga
Unniyasthi
Give me a hammer. Ganai velocity has
consumed. Ganai velocity has consumed.
Ganai velocity has consumed.
Do you want
any nails?
B Club
Yes,
I want nails. B Club
uh uh uh uh uh uh
Here are a hammer and nails. I'm gonna go
lost yeah no I'm gonna go lost yeah no I'm
gonna go lost yeah no I'm gonna go lost
yeah no
I'm gonna go lost yeah no
Thanks. Vata. Vata. Vata.
Vata. Vata. Vata. Vata.
End of the dialogue.
Additional vocabulary drill. One. Bill is
working. Will do language learning.
Will do language learning.
Two. Bill is speaking. Will go on it.
Will go on it.
Three, Bill is building a house.
Four, Bill is thinking.
Five, Bill is helping.
Six,
Bill is sleeping. We'll go to sleep.
We'll go to sleep.
Question Drill. You will hear the
question, What is Bill doing? six times.
Give a one-word answer using the verb
found in the corresponding numbers of the
additional vocabulary drill.
One. What's your name, Will?
Too long, Mr. Donner.
Too long, Mr. Donner. Two.
What's your name, Will?
Go on me. Go on me. Three. Go on me.
Go on me. Go on me. Go on me. Go on me. Go
on me. Go on me. Go on me. Go on me. Go on
me. Go on me. Go on me. Go on
me.
Five. Six. Ten.
Twelve. Thirteen.
Fourteen.
Fifteen.
Dialogue at normal speed. Do not repeat.
Listen for comprehension only.
End of lesson three.
Thank you.